we can have everybody trying to take
their seats we uh just like it was a
bank in the early 1930s when we brought
the pizza and I think everyone has food
I like to welcome everyone and outdoor
panel today my name's Brian juden I'm
the President of the Federal society
here at believe in Mary school off we
are honored to have a great selection of
participants in this panel the panel is
being sponsored by the federalist
society and the Institute of bill of
rights law student division I just is a
announcement prior to going to the panel
this friday and saturday will be the
annual supreme court preview we are
going to be passing around a list on
saturday will be having panels at twelve
o'clock noon those panels are open to
the public and anyone who wishes to
attend but we do need you to RSVP the
two panels that the Institute bill
Bryant slaw in the Federalist Society
will be sponsoring one is on race in the
fourth there's quite a few affirmative
action cases kind of circulating in the
news right now I and then the other is
on elena kagan's version here on the
court we have some great panel
participant cellulolytic is going to be
on the bigoted handle and then judge
Harvey Wilkinson up there for search
important appeals is going to be on the
race in the court panel amongst other
people so we'll be passing around this
list if you're interested in attending
if you'd like to RSVP please put down
your name email address in which
with that I turn the time over to our
moderator professor Paul Marcus well hi
everybody it is a pleasure to be here at
the first order of business these are
wear jackets feel free to take them off
here most of you are standing there are
some open seats are you down here if you
have to open seat next to you which is
raise your hand yeah so Kaz wanna sit
feel free there's their pieces and we'll
be out in time for 25 classes cheese how
it is a pleasure to have all of you boil
with us today issued couldn't talk about
today pretty interesting pretty
controversial on the case before the
Supreme Court here are a little bit more
paths this deals with the GPS tracking
system will be a little bit more about
that and really what broader issue be
done in terms of the Fourth Amendment
technology and before confirm we have
pretty really understanding perilous of
with a star today of beginning a very
short instructions for my colleagues
here a present or occur from Washington
University School ball is one of the
great I experts country portables
particularly owners respect to to
technology next again is our old at
least for the semester Hollinger knowing
we will assist from their Kansas of
nursery lost why senator are in her
criminal procedure to craft a break
apparel and extra her is stable Clark
from the law firm of innocent and
Councilman he represented the defendant
in the DC Circuit and I was born soon
arguing before the US Supreme Court on
the capital criminal defendant in the
actual face of brother but the plan here
he is press the car people a little bit
about two minute drill to just kind of
bring up the stock with respect to the
actual case that went up to the court
what the issues are there and then I'm
gonna start throwing a whole bunch of
questions to my colleagues on the panel
each question each of them will be able
to respond to come out there after and
nothing is a limit of time but we're
going to save some time for questions
that from all of you and the only thing
point I would make is any question
indirect feel free to direct for an
individual but i'ma let the other
panelists away in as well but that would
be about a half an hour program so
without any further ado
great pleasure pleasure to be here thank
you for coming out and letting us see
your lunch I've entertainment so the
case is called United States versus
Jones and involved a criminal defendant
in Washington DC who ran a nightclub in
Washington DC and on the side was
selling cocaine science side operate the
government wanted to monitor his
location in order to prove that Jones
was involved in narcotics conspiracy to
the attached a GPS device to his car and
watched him watch the location of the
car for 30 days the quest that that
evidence then was used to help prove the
conspiracy the idea being that the
government showed that the location of
goats are was near the stash house where
the drugs were kept at particular times
and so the issue in this case is whether
the use of the GPS surveillance either
the installation of the GPS device or
the use of the GPS device determine the
location of Jones's car is a search or
seizure under the Fourth Amendment the
government did in fact get a warrant at
an earlier stages case that warrant had
expired and was from a different
jurisdiction so it was not applicable to
this case but the issue really boils
down to whether the installation and use
of the GPS surveillance violated a Jones
and reasonable expectations of privacy
or was a somehow a seizure of his
property and the two precedents to keep
in mind our first case called knox KN 0
pts and a second case called Cairo there
are cases from the early nineteen
eighties involving beepers so in these
earlier cases because you know 30 years
ago the government would install
monitoring device at something of a
beeper radio beeper that was inside say
a box or some sort of piece of property
that would then be put into the suspects
car and that would allow the government
to follow the suspect from a distance
say a hundred yards or three hundred
yards in order to determine their
location and so the issue in the knots
case is how different if at all is GPS
surveillance from this radio beeper
surveillance in the knots in Cairo cases
the Supreme Court said there was no
reasonable expectation of privacy in
your in a physical location of a car on
public roads in the NOx case therefore
no warrant needed to install the
surveillance device in of a huge sorry
use the monitoring of the beeper on
public streets however the cairo case
the Supreme Court said it is the search
that does violate a reasonable
expectation of privacy to use that
monitoring device to determine the
location of the monitoring device inside
a home such as for example a car gets
driven into a garage it's inside the
home the curtilage of the home and
therefore a warrant is required so be
issue today 30 years later is whether
that cairo not rule still applies and
whether it applies to gps surveillance
given the differences between gps and
the more primitive radio beepers from
the 19 that's okay well thanks terminus
that's pretty good let me start with
this big question which is whether the
DC Circuit got it right the DC Circuit
of course sided with the defense
government feeling to the Supreme Court
and Steve I'll start with you I'm
guessing you think the spring of the
certain kind of right
to make a little closer so our position
is the fourth one would said where the
look at perspective seizure when agents
or occasionally a past me gps already
looked on it as a search for when they
say blessings opening secretly installed
the gps device to the car when they
remotely relentlessly tales accurate
even killed i want to point this out but
vast majority of time operation what the
issues are still down to probably is is
different than people and of course
jean-pierre so like you collect to make
it's a pervasive certainty so
electronics or something to collect
static and chords down record the effort
be careful
space at Point jokes gazed a monitor
they recorded his movements every 10
seconds of the day the moment Scotty
every 10 seconds of the day 24 7 for 28
days we do as constitutional amendment
here to warrant and they had a warrant
in this case they just let Warren expire
before they installed the GPS and then
were the GPS device rebooting would you
get place man down getting bother your
warrant that time they just rebooted it
because i think that the notch a
terrible long in case of development our
position is those cases involved
significantly drama technology and what
we have here as i said is pervasive
monitoring
simply trips to a highway in which the
police could keep the car with an oral
rain but please immediately cabled
Antoine drum the vast majority time they
work their enjoyment just let the
Machine record let me interrupt because
I think we the folks in a minute on
Carol and cavitation specific
I think it's a tough issue because the
court described a mosaic theory work
they essentially said that even though
we're going to focus on is a theory just
a second because it risk different
parties here there's Mike off it's my
mic is yes turn your mic off please oh
yes you know use mine you mean I'm have
to belt it out cuz I'm guessing not you
can hear me okay okay sorry no sorry the
bottom line is I think they got it right
I'm not sure I dunno reasoning I think
they may be went over further than a you
to explain why is a pervasive
surveillance is something that where you
have a reason why I put a deposit you
can round out it I would have stopped
shorted us I think the bottom line this
thing anyway I'm guessing what you're
saying is different too I think you
could reason to either conclusion from
available legal materials if you're a
lower court I think you're pretty much
stuck with the knots Caroline that the
court drew the court said pretty clearly
you don't have a reasonable expectation
of privacy in public and the DC Circuit
has pretty much invent a novel mosaic
theory which i think is extremely
unlikely to be adopted by the US Supreme
Court in order to try to get around that
folding of the Supreme Court cannot to
my mind the real question in this case
is you should the court overturned not
or at least sharply limit not not too
much more simple technologies that don't
have this sort of invasive potential I
think you can basically get either
either result but I think the basic line
drawn by knotts and
was actually a pretty reasonable Fourth
Amendment line to draw that the
government can monitor individuals in
public just like they can watch people
in public so they can monitor people in
private taking a lot of people at home
that's not the only line you can take
but I think it's actually a pretty
reasonable line that the court drew and
mike continuum is today let's talk a
little bit more about those cases you
mentioned the to care or not it's an out
of all the cases here seem to start with
let ok there's the cat case we're really
the first one the phone case but then
there's another case too that's
mentioned I guess I I want to the floor
or the three who take a look at the
package and that's a chiro case the
imaging case imaging inside the house
with coming outside the house and Mellie
let me ask you to take a stab at when
you put these four together whether you
buy the mosaic theory or not which we're
gonna get you in a second look at it
right in terms of applying those four as
a package I stupid think dude that is
who's our excitation privacy where
public as we keep it for enjoyment the
one thing that just spoil oneself and
kyla which is the heat imaging kid
who in size it was home essentially are
perceived informations coming out using
a technological realizing it receives
them he still says the means matter that
is he pointed out that if you want to
know who's in the house you can have
surveillance around the house and watch
who comes in he goes out but you can
necessarily bust in the door and check
out so I think if we read these together
we are looking at expectations of
privacy cooler looking at the means by
which the government is infringing on
this expectation of privacy so I think
they fit together nicely I think that's
the difference or you mentioned Carol is
it not are you moving at all by looking
at katzen and kylo or two very different
kinds of cases and what in both cases
were quite close ended well I mean the
ultimate question in the case is not
whether they're protiv indenture from
government it's what kind of rules we're
talking about kylo i think is so far
removed from these sorts of fact it was
a thermal imaging device used to detect
the temperature of the palm the wall
exterior wall of the home so you can
take that as being a case about the need
for privacy protection in a home in
which case that lends no support to
Jones's argument because of course this
surveillance was in public or you can
see it is about sort of the need of the
Fourth Amendment to adapt to changing
circumstances in which case you can say
it does apply so I think those two are
roughly in equipoise I don't think I
love really tilt one way or the other
that's my Steven your argument you
really pull it all of these together
I think it's really like torture more
grateful profile on Monday factor
conspiracy is that we weaken kaiba has
been from the proposition that the
Fourth Amendment does keep patient
technology and as melhores all means do
matter the fourth member were designed
to curtail was abuse of power barbecue
or diesel powered by the government and
for that reason before the government
agents should be allowed to convey a
person's property 14 invade and regional
expectation of passion it really ought
to be something to balance and to assess
what we have shown take the lodge need
to do that McConnell points out in one
pot kylo involve the home which is
certainly somewhere different but in
kila kila also has is this what's
politician what kind of a life you want
to live under the Fourth Amendment what
the men were designed to do our
port amendments design some degree for
protect against arbitrary engages in
which thought about of privacy security
what you have here is a pervasive
monitoring and recording of somebody's
moving in public now it may be an attack
our grant that I'm to Cairo and nods by
the individual discreet tripper to on
the highway anybody can observe that but
nobody realistically expect some police
to be tailing him or her for twenty-four
seven for weeks on end that's
unrealistic the police don't do that and
the quantum
lives nods karo kylo & calves you look
to what people what society is prepared
to accept is readable and it's
objectively reasonable to believe as
follows that a next-door neighbor isn't
going to be taking your car and turning
it into a radio beacons over here she
can follow where you are and that's a
civil court or could be a criminal
trespass that's reasonable it's also
reasonable concern with the police on
can be following twenty-four seven
that's a message um we don't say that
the police can't follow you they can
follow you as long as they want visually
but here this isn't a tale this is an
electronic search make no mistakes about
that's what it is it's a subject what
will steal any press you wouldn't
farther down an ascot Oh mark to weigh
in as well the motion of this mosaic
theory which apart from the result it's
a theory that has really gotten a lot of
controversial comment outfit it's the
notion that you don't look at one day or
one action but you take it all as a
whole very unusual theory of the Supreme
Court you're some language out of the DC
Circuit and your ears pretty good frame
when it comes to privacy however
president hasn't suggest that the whole
maybe more revealing than the parts what
may seem trivial to the uninformed may
appear a great moment to one who has a
broad view of the scene steve is that
really grabbed in the Constitution that
there a pic with your interpreter worth
jessica bergman sandy was and looked at
her realistics of the situation is it
concentration when the birth yes and
then he stopped with this proposition of
basic piece of data may not mean much
better namrata better to meet a lot why
did they put a GPS on Anton Jones of
life spark that they wanted to figure
out where he was going over time to have
to associate him curtains and places
they expected to sit back and have a lot
to relational fashion particular case on
and what really is if you're going to do
that people don't expect you society
doesn't he's going to turn your car into
baby or you have a different view it
yeah although I'm undecided as to which
side should ultimately win on the court
I think the mothers day periods public
religious just doesn't work and here's
why so the Fourth Amendment basically
divides the world of police practices
into things that don't require a warrant
and things that do require a warrant and
then tells the police if you want to get
a warrant to search a really private
place like a home you need to do a lot
of the things that don't require warrant
until you get probable cause so the
government essentially has to create a
mosaic in their warrant application in
order to get a warrant to search the
private places what the court says in
creating this mosaic theory is
individual pieces can amount to
significant evidence that really shows
what a person is doing but of course
that's the purpose of the warrant
requirement is to require the government
to create the mosaic before they can get
the court order that lets them go into
the really private places so I don't
think that theory works and I think part
of the problem of it is is if you think
that a month of surveillance is too long
a month creates the mosaic what about a
week what about a day what about
hours I the law professors dream I
incredibly annoying Socratic questioning
that's tomorrow in class even the DC
Circuit they don't try to draw the line
and as far as I know human proponents of
mosaic theory don't have a say as don't
don't know where what the time is it was
the line should be drawn so I think that
idea is sort of gradually accumulating
non searches that at day 5 say are not a
search but then by day 30 retro actively
makes the whole thing a search it's a
novel interesting academic theory but it
uh I don't think the justices are going
to buy it then I think it's rooted no
you also have some hesitancy about
theory i do but i think they rely on
Freedom of Information Act case for the
government
versus Maryland which is the pre
register case which actually I think
proves the opposite that is immature the
government is taking gathering
information just all the numbers it's
called
picture of us and supreme courts are
well you know you basically assume the
rest of dialing into the phone to know
they rejected and so I don't think
there's any basis interesting is Nava we
hope you'll make arguments and don't I
think insured well let me think about
some and each of the three imagine the
each of you talk about the tiny there's
some relevance is it an hours of the day
is a week or month that's it but I want
to shift it a little bit in one of the
early GPS cases it's only about 89 years
old it's early in this area it's a case
called United States are seen in the
Seventh Circuit and Judge Posner was not
terribly sympathetic to the argument of
the fennec made it was a short term
surveillance didn't involve a major in
physical injury to put the gps of my
skin but what he did say was this isn't
that case but if there does come a time
where we're talking about macerate of
large numbers of people then we really
may want to rethink how the Fourth
Amendment applies in them I guess that's
the strand I don't start with you on
this one melody but I don't want to get
to hear why does that matter I mean it's
not gonna be a class action as the
individuals bringing motions to suppress
evidence i assume order this mess oh why
should we care if it's one person or
entity well i guess i would say just as
more
register case but he says we'll look can
the government just stamp out someone's
reasonable expectation of privacy I just
putting on a notice that segment we're
going to do this or everybody be on
notice that you know if I have privacy
maybe there is that issue that we do
need to be worried about the means we do
this Kim says look at the four minutes
about protecting privacy is protected
dignity as in technology we have to have
some way so the course going to look for
love is I think those are worried about
I still don't think the mosaic is
necessarily means of protecting us I
think we can protect it on at least
either limiting the case well we have
our following the principles are nice
around Steve judge posters concerns hood
sure the utmost respect for Richard
progeny today's i was reading
Frederick's on at night during the
elegant quieting this Y thinking wrong
undead why first of all defendant
developed a case essentially conceded
that notch and Carol controlling and
didn't really force them to arrest the
GTF of Sun degenerates to notice that
made our decision but more importantly
what potent address when he decided
whether well what not really man
you can tell somebody you can put
wouldn't be / had to save the GPS
effectively knots reserved a question
the time comes when dragnet surveillance
as a simple revisit the issue and judge
posner dragnet meant mass surveillance
but as Professor were there Hutchins
port development really well-written
larger are inside an offering for the
judge Kinberg family in Adams agreement
that's not all with not said we're not
said that drag it in the context of an
ounce opinion could well include an
individual Stewart a despot quadratic
methods of surveillance of one would
have looked at dictionaries that were
even in use of 1918 dragon was replying
to include search above an individual so
one doesn't have to have mass
surveillance one can have surveillance
of individual being dragnet surveillance
but as somebody pointed up to meet a
real difficult issue in this case it's
not as easy but the most difficult issue
where you draw the line is all in four
summers of abundance in a week you don't
have to be Jack you could take the
reasonable positional CBS a free to go
busting position now putting this on
your car is wrong
let me go back to you if there's
evidence in a case like this guess the
next one come on the right and the
detector from the Fairfax County where
it is or DC says yeah we've put on 200
cars what to have a lot of the cheap
you're accurate now and my god we came
up with something really interesting is
that going to weigh in on a course
analysis I think I mean if you're asking
sort of what is the Supreme Court likely
to do about that kind of problem i think
the scope of the surveillance in terms
of how often is law enforcement using
the technique has a role in shaping how
the justices think about the problem
it's something that's being done really
often they think it's a bigger problem
that if it's something that's not being
done all that often so i think it has
some impact on them the hard question is
where to where in terms of the doctrine
do you take that sort of an instinct or
fear of incredibly wide scale
surveillance and where does it make a
difference and i think it makes a
difference in saying that the use of the
technology is a surge because it is so
widespread because it can be so invasive
effectively the use of the technology
and its widespread use going to the
threat to privacy that it creates and
then there's room of the doctrine for
saying that that's relevant to whether
it's a search even though formally
speaking the doctrine doesn't really
care whether a technique is being used
once or a thousand times or a million
times so so the widespread use is not
clearly that finally relevant but i
think it it shapes how the justices
think about yeah they had posted words
click move by that in terms of a
specific concern well let's start going
to shift gears a little don't start with
me don't go down go down with pounder
there have been some argue that the
problem in this area is not so much the
surveillance but if the installation of
the image but somebody has to physically
clamp it down on your fender with some
sort of magnetic velcro their various
ways of doing and that's really my
question how important is that because
indeed as the DC Circuit mentioned there
now these are a futuristic sounding
darts that you can shoot out and and
they will go ahead but as we all know
there are lots of devices will use that
are imminently traffic and who knows
what those 2012 vehicles are going to be
having they may not have to install any
that matter I think the installation of
the device does matter and if I had to
guess I think this case generally is
going to divide the justices and it's
unclear which way they'll go but I would
guess that the most defendant friendly
argument the conservative justices are
going to be particularly interested in
is focus on the installation of the
device not the use of the device and the
idea would be this is an interference
with your property you are the
government is is saying we're going to
turn your property into our means of
surveillance and they are attaching
something to that property in the Fifth
Amendment setting that would be a taking
it would be an interference with your
private property therefore thinking and
the difficulty is is trying to fit that
into current Fourth Amendment doctrine
the government isn't getting any
information from the installation so it
wouldn't seem to be a search which
usually requires a painting information
the question becomes whether it's a
seizure which requires substantial
interference with the possessory
interest in property that usually means
control over the property either taking
it away or not letting somebody who
controls it access it and it's not clear
that that is occurring here either is
the properties and so much being seized
as it is that sort of it's the rights of
exclusivity are being interfered with
the property interest is being
interfered with without an obvious
seizure so that issue as to whether
that's a a seizure or a search I think
is going to really trouble the more
conservative justices and one thing to
watch out for in the dynamics is whether
you'll get a couple votes on
on the conservative justices on that
theory couple votes from the
liberal-leaning justices on the theory
that it's a search to use the technology
and it might be that there's a mix based
on those interesting you can see the
courts got a really splintering on this
one Melanie you're taking about the the
installation part of it yeah I think
it's not it's definitely troubling but I
really learned that if it has to be a
meaningful their parents or the
possessory interest no I'm not sure I
just attaching some small advice we
didn't notice which part of what we
don't know is there the definition
quarters users it strikes me at some
level as it it must be so but if you
would go if we look at the prior
president I'd hope to get fits neatly so
I think it wasn't relevant justices but
i'm not sure that identical at least
less expand the definition
it is a senior we should see for search
and seizure on you look at the classic
sense of this case call Silverman versus
United States item number here despite
my case would cite a number years before
calves it's somewhat still good law what
Silverman said if you're inserting
somebody's property and dominating it
controlling it that's what it would
happen here be government he served in
foreign films of white car and
indiscriminately he monitored and
recorded every woman he made back to be
searched adultspace seizure in the sense
that it is a seizure in the sense that
he is a meaningful in Afghan someone's
property rights property at time frames
about the Constitution that do I have to
control with or exclusion defend others
from taking their property and hear
about Antoine journals knowledge or
consent about of his wife Roma car and
drove the car the government as I use
that phrase I
converted into an involuntary radio
beacon so we do that they didn't prevent
from driving the car but it certainly
was a meaningful interference in their
possessory way well we've been talking
so far about the action of the police
here arguably requiring warrant or not
requiring work hypothetically still
wants to come before this report decide
let's suppose the Supreme Court decides
that a warrant is necessary and my
question in the panel and and Steve
all-star remember this ability is if
you're a federal district judge or a
state trial judge of being a request is
made for a warrant in connection with
GPS device what kind of restrictions are
partly going to be wasn't you what is it
you really are looking for your the
attitude well would I be first of all
what I'd be hoping by that time that
Congress would have responded decision
by doing with evil katzenberger versus
New York or analogous creating a careful
thought of legislative scheme that
stated what I that didn't happen but I'd
be looking for the have a mint probably
thought that show me it's more likely
than not that this criminal activity
report to have been showing me that
that the use of the GPS is appropriate
under the circumstances have a exotic
available tools that are going to need
this but most importantly what steps
have they taken to minimize intrusion or
other people's bikes if it's possible
Antoine Jones case wife owned the car
his wife drove a car somewhere nope no
provisions were made to minimize
interference if she would drive the car
and I think lastly I'd want to know I've
a skating for all you really need it for
he won't happen on forever if you want
to happen up with limitlessly I mean
which of course would violate the
Constitution but i would say what's a
reason what their captain I'll in this
state the war did provide the 90-day
surveillance it just what the one
expired in doing well Stevie we go on
know what Steve is now done very
artfully I'll say he has taken the
federal statute we have currently for
electronic eavesdropping which is a
direct result of the cats case phone tap
case and he's imposed three requirements
and I guess that those are the ones i
want to ask no an orange economy which
are in the statute at a very routine but
usually aren't present with warrants
general number one police officer I knew
exhausted other less intrusive means
before you before I give you this
warrant number two how are you know
limit the intrusion with respect to
other people not just this person again
typically have a warrant to search your
house we're not worried about who else
is living in the house get searched the
house and three what kind of time limit
are we talking about here again with a
search of a house or a car that you go
in you're searching that's kind of over
a very brief period not true with
electronic surveillance not only if you
are fashioning a warrant at Congress
does it
I'm not to worry about the other less
intrusive means because I think unlike a
wiretap without are talking about
something if it's less intrusive that's
what makes the case I think so
interesting is that you are traveling in
public we had thousand month we talked
to and you could watch almost there is
goes on I don't think everything my
printer so I think the restriction
should be much lower I do think up that
time limit is a reasonable description
that would be something I mean even when
you execute a warrant to do whatever it
is or something you have to do a certain
times of that I think that's consistent
and then in terms of limiting exposure
of other people i think that is
appropriate in the sense that arguably
if they're not just attaching the GPS
and do no surveillance of their own then
hopefully i know more exactly i'll gps
works but i assume that you could
determine what it is reporting not
before i'm wrong but if that's possible
that would be easy to carve out the time
period during which the builders
travelled in the car and I do think
those things make it resources and
bottoms post about reasonable governor
contributed but that's a pretty
restrictive warm you're not talking it's
not the war to search the house I put an
assistant you have to execute the worm
within so many agents
I mean I think there are some typical
restrictions on rust and we generally
apply or at least we could amount John
smells I just don't think that the
shuttle bus less intrusive meetings yeah
so a person is just from a policy
standpoint assuming there's a probable
cause requirement I would say the only
one of those issues that I think is
really needed would be the time period
which is inherently something that has
to come up with something that occurs
over a period of time so maybe 30 days
or something like that I don't think it
I don't know what pair of this wrong you
of that I mean I think I think the idea
of minimization requirements exhaustion
requirements and coming out for the
wiretap setting that think of the
wiretap setting its communications with
other people right and maybe a small
percentage of someone's communications
are likely to actually involve criminal
activity and a lot of it is going to be
pretty private communications I think
the location of a car on a public street
is not nearly as invasive so I'm not as
concerned from a policy standpoint with
with some of those other requirements i
would say that even if the court says
that there is no search or seizure
involved here I think statute should be
passed I think the policy question is a
dependent of a constitutional question
and and I think I'm worried about two
different things i'm worried about
government usages so i can imagine for
example a statute that says the
government needs reasonable suspicion to
determine the location of a car to use a
gps device
period of time or probable cause I don't
have strong views as to which is better
but I think that it should also prohibit
private party use of GPS surveillance
devices we just haven't seen a lot of
this because of the GPS tools that would
record the information internally right
now are currently only sold law
enforcement atop you know when you get a
GPS at a store you can type it in a
dress a little thank-you there and it'll
tell you where you are on the road but
it's not keeping a record of where you
were every 10 seconds or so so
eventually that technology will be
widely available to the public and I
want to make sure that the individuals
aren't you know you xxx's or people that
aren't trusting each other although all
the kind of cases you can imagine them
now as to why people snoop on others you
know that's you can imagine instead of
just checking some of these email or
trying to log into their Facebook
account they're sticking a GPS device to
see where they're going so that should
be a crime as well well I said we have a
whole bunch more questions but we don't
have a whole bunch more time probably
good good moment for those in the
audience to wait questions that you
offer it wouldn't go on for bit nasty
real gotten this repair is there are any
a 1041 then to the other tutorial is
there any argument to I mean you early
were talking about the police having two
are worried about a mosaic of different
sorts of searches this very argument to
maybe courts looking at like pieces of
evidence for being a cop
Jose or they are or were you worried
about courts not being able to
differentiate between different types of
evidence yeah I just don't know how you
grouped the evidence in any way so
imagine investigation where they're ten
police officers you include their
popular surveillance they're just
watching right do you accurate that over
time you've just considered GPS what if
it includes containing telephone numbers
dialed the pen register information that
I don't know of any way of sort of
coherently saying only this is
considered and here's how you determine
when you get to the warrant point in
part the problem is the technology is
always changing right so what a GPS does
gps device does today look at different
planet does and will be a lot cheaper
penalty I mean seriously one of the
issues that has come up now in the last
ten years they have gotten extremely
inexpensive and you don't need a whole
lot of labor for someone to manage so
it's much more widespread use to their
lives Melanie you're sensitive I'm not
sure I think if you have a non sort of
Japan
a bunch of non searches you standing on
search right so I don't know that it
necessarily matter just registered I
don't know that so much matters I guess
it support buys into that then the
problems was pointed out there are
endless I mean this group and actually
for this group it takes me that
non-surgical salons are just around I
don't want to get bogged down okay
if you look at life a little closer the
question is your form of the devices
regard to remotely monitor unit circle
search and seizure they're very Doria
lakers enormous amount of electronic
data they couldn't otherwise get him
recording because the GPS does reported
that a search I mean a mosaic 33 that
issues aside for what you did respond
love you whatever whatever using GPS
without a bit all realize it usually get
a long way to surveillance because they
want to draw inferences for like a
question is pain can look at a table
over God and won't dare sip that stand
back look and see a lot if you like
impressions right we should all do yes
I'm wondering this is for everyone
really baby skin will start with you of
maple this way federal more from the
bird what makes it rise to the point
that it becomes so much more invasive
even perhaps in the arc
because on the outside of the car rather
than what's inside of the property well
the beeper beeper cases issue of
installation wasn't an issue they're
transferred by government performance
and cans and then ultimately ended up
the people's vehicles what's different
about GPS is followed number one it's
it's a complete substitute in a be
portrayed you have to have the
proverbial proverbial police officer we
visit our colleague on a box of jelly
roll donuts in a patrol car okay that's
not true of the GPS it's an automated
search provides the police can be one
watching football in fact in the New
York days he will be we prevail upon
watching football on welding machine
with this recording where the suspect is
going secondly is the recording of
functionary court precision where
somebody or somebody is going it's not
it's not a sense augmenting device is
not an akin to binoculars it's a sense
of planting device and Tibet extent I
respectfully suggest even slum years
away from
GPS again think of it I mean people
think of it this way the pervasiveness
of it all the input data but it gets to
work on far different if you're going to
court the police officer with a fever he
or she's gotta stay fly so I sought that
particular time in Jones's cases 3,000
pages of that of it showed up in seven
to 10 people he was every 10 seconds of
the day yeah I mean I think it's tricky
because as soon as you draw the line
between the beaver and a GPS
surveillance what would the police do
they'll go right to the footman side
that the radio beepers side of that and
say okay will do this without a warrant
and then you say okay well you're
allowed to do that because we drew the
line there so i think it is tricky
that's tomorrow in the simplest way of
ruling for the defense one way to say
the installation of the beaver is a
search or seizure the other is to say
that knocks is overturned we don't
really have deeper cases anywhere that's
not a technology that they've used so if
you overturn not you haven't actually
changed the outcome of any practical
investigations you've just said that for
the 2011 technology there's a different
rule than there was for the nineteen
eighties technology I think that's
actually a simpler way of doing it then
then trying to come up with exactly what
is it that this English the beaver front
for the GPS I think will receive those
on at least previously the cases we will
get a we've got to assume the rest we
lost our expectation of privacy because
let the police can be on there we can
watch us or they can hear us at my speed
use glasses they went
knock doors but there they are it's
basically this augmentation with the
peeper whereas consider home apparently
mush of all games and happy that's
substantially different for one reason
we don't assume the risk that the police
urge us to sit at home and monitor us I
think I think there's a I think there is
a difference if we're using something up
augment our ability to push his ability
to investigate that is fundamentally
different from substitution my question
kind of tags on to that well what about
the law enforcement and viewpoint of
this and how we kind of touched on this
when are we talking about Congress and
legislature but at the same time you
know these things could become less
expensive than manpower and I think
professor Wilson points out well you can
have a thousand police officers on the
street and then you would monitor all of
those things but have to put a GPS in
somebody's car is significantly less
expensive so you know if you're doing a
balancing test between privacy and
government interest it's less expensive
and more accurate and reduces a huge
margin of error and in addition I think
these kind of technologies improve the
access that the government has two
larger crimes and conspiracies for
smaller prize you know like people you
know stop and frisks and like Brandon
like small amounts of drugs that are
found in person so how would you respond
to that melon or so
first I'll point out the fourth event is
not protected places you at dusk and
you're exactly what I think the Kyllo
case which just had this they're very
primitive thermal imaging machine
answers this question that is at that
time you could just see heat basically
telling which areas were the highest
probably tell whether human beings of us
well now the technology so that you can
probably an eye on my ex promise but we
can probably see pretty readily I think
there's a thermal imaging where you can
see inside cars and so if you're exactly
right for not too much money it's
certainly very effective it and stamping
out prime as people drive by the cars
you can just point the image arrived at
the super very very great danes or
cocaine or just point to it would be
very efficient but i think the problem
is if there is going to be privacy is
protected by the papers then the police
have to have people in this office and
so we have to find those knees woman if
we really are only rebelled song crime
and all this technology is great couple
points i agree with you wholeheartedly
society should combat crime person's
house undo it and I respect the
suggestion of those Allegra Fourth
Amendment once the strike balance that I
want to make sure that company
now let me he was a figure about my
college or incursion the other day
a seminar kinda because 100 and 500
550,000 bond federal law enforcement
agents that have West powers just think
of it what kind of a country we have all
150,000 405 out normal correct she had
the ability to walk around on a better
discretion put one of these in your car
there's nothing that pedal that's why i
said in state level i'm pretty sure i'm
additional that was 650,000 their little
so think of the states that there are
some states like New York Massachusetts
dead Washington Oregon so you've got to
have probable cause and warm let's
assume there are others who monrovia and
Avars have gone the other way to begin
your being one there's 600 so let's take
out the New York people let's take out
the Oregon Washington Massachusetts law
enforcement agents how do you feel about
a country in which there are five
hundred twenty-five thousand people to
walk around speaking on devices on your
part
about somebody to say poisons that right
so law enforcement is not hand provided
before seeking they gotta warn this case
i just decided for whatever reason they
didn't want to why they let it expire
bigger they would do it on the tree
candle and I'm said I think the
government perspective is is a perfectly
reasonable one which is to say listen
we're allowed to watch bad guys public
fact we're supposed to do that that's
part of our job and so if we have tools
that let us do that cheaply what we are
doing and we're accurate and more
accurately we are prettier punching bad
guys and saving the taxpayer dollars
neither of which are bad things so so
that ultimately the same rule should
apply whether it's watching through
eyesight or using a beeper or using a
GPS device one of the interesting things
about this I think is that the GPS
devices that the law enforcement uses
were created at a time when it's thought
to be the rule the GPS devices are not
regulated by the Fourth Amendment let's
say the Supreme Court says well this is
now regulated by the Fourth Amendment
and they pick some aspect for example
let's say it's the fact that the GPS
device records the location every 10
seconds or seven seconds well you could
then just reconfigure just change the
software so that it registers location
every five minutes or maybe only during
the daytime that's just a software issue
so the notion of what a GPS device is is
something that itself is really flexible
and depending on how the court writes a
rule it could be one where it looks like
it's one rule but actually you can just
change the software and get a get a
different result depending on how the
gps devices particular we have time for
about one short question and three short
short answers I guess the
it's also much more accurate than I was
as well as i could use but i think i'm
quite a little bit but not so much and
what a reasonable time frame would be
for their perspective you work with it
in statute because as we know
investigations for the range and there
may only be one transaction every once
awhile so where is that line if the
Congress with the drama on what would be
a reasonable time 30 seconds creature
anybody stopping people but on a paper
I'm straight dirty varies with the
larger rear quarters I think the right
to reapply it's the main thing
14 and a half day